---
layout: "post"
title: "The NixOps Experience: Are you deployed?"
author: "~sky"
---

---

I love to rave about nix, and how declarative configs should be the norm on Linux distros.

It should be no surprise, then, that I think NixOS should be an industry standard for operations,
and all DevOps related woes.

Where's the catch then? What's the other side of this oh-so-perfect coin? **Deployment**.

Due to its unique design and its oddities, NixOS is hard to *deploy*. Well-known tools are built with "normal" distros like Debian or RedHat (or its derivates of course) in mind, and do not adjust well to NixOS' oddities.

To deal with this, I'm gonna talk a bit about [NixOps](https://github.com/NixOS/nixops) (formerly known as Charon)

## Overview

"NixOps is a tool for deploying to NixOS machines in a network or cloud", says the repository description.

More specifically, what it means is that you can define your *actual* NixOS machine on one side, and completely decouple it from its target(s). I'll get to this in the example, but yes, this means that NixOps heavily simplifies both testing, and multi-cloud management.

Of course, standard limitations of NixOS still apply (that is, services that aren't packaged on **nixpkgs** must be packaged and provided to the machine), but for the better part, most common services are provided and are ready to be consumed.

## Installation and configuration (AWS)

Getting NixOps is dead easy if you're running on NixOS: simply add the `nixops` derivation to the list of system (or user, if you prefer to use `home-manager`) packages.

If running nix on a different system, however, the special precaution of running `nixops` with sudo might be necessary as well.

Regarding configuration for AWS, profiles created via CLI work out of the box, with no extra setup required. Otherwise, NixOps supports a space-separated format for profiles, via the `~/.ec2-keys` file:

```
<AWS_ACCESS_KEY> <AWS_ACCESS_SECRET> <PROFILE_NAME>
```

## Usage by example

### Objective

What I hope to demonstrate with this example is how straightforward a NixOS declaration is, and how simple NixOps's separation of concerns for targets is handled.

For this, I based my project off of the manual's "Trivial Example", which declares a NixOS machine with httpd, and `valgrind`'s HTML documentation.

NOTE: Some fixes were necessary, since the example as-is in the NixOps manual uses a deprecated httpd declaration.

In order to demonstrate target separation as well, I've declared two AWS targets (to simulate real-world usage), and a local VirtualBox target. It's also possible to target accessible NixOS machines via IP address, but this was not demonstrated in this project.

### Project layout

In essence, a NixOps project consists of a declared NixOS machine (aka, its `configuration.nix`), and one or more *targets* for it.

The layout for this project is as follows:

* `/entrypoint.nix`: This is the "main" file for the machine declaration. It contains a collection of resources, which might be explicited there, or on separate files if necessary
* `/targets/`: A directory that contains declarations for the many targets this projects aims to serve
  * `vbox.nix`: VirtualBox target
  * `aws.nix`: Trivial AWS target
  * `aws-with-sg.nix`: As its name suggests, an extended AWS target with custom Security Group declarations

Tentatively, if the project required custom packaging for certain resources, I'd include a `pkgs` directory, with a `<resource>.nix` for each one, exposing its resulting derivation.

A `tests` directory could be included as well, in case the project is sensible enough to require an automated testing battery against the resulting machine (this is where an independent virtualbox/libvirt target comes in handy).

### Example execution

The "standard" cycle for a NixOps execution would be:

1. Create deployment (specifying a machine, its target, and a name)
2. Execute said deployment
3. Once no longer needed, tear down the deployment
4. If deprecated or no longer to be used, delete the deployment

As a way of demonstration, these are copypasted commands I used while building the example project:

```bash
# Create the named deployment, specifying its details and deployment target
[reimu@hakurei:~/IaC/NixOps/Example]$ nixops create ./entrypoint.nix targets/aws.nix -d example
# Execute the named deployment
[reimu@hakurei:~/IaC/NixOps/Example]$ nixops deploy -d example
# Access "webserver" instance of the "example" deployment via an ssh wrapper
[reimu@hakurei:~/IaC/NixOps/Example]$ nixops ssh -d example webserver
# Destroy resources related to the "example" deployment
# Note: although nixops prompts confirmation for each resource, this can be
# skipped by passing the --confirm flag
[reimu@hakurei:~/IaC/NixOps/Example]$ nixops destroy -d example
# Get rid of the named deployment, to ensure no further use
[reimu@hakurei:~/IaC/NixOps/Example]$ nixops delete -d example
```

## Other notes

This is a collection of thoughts and things I considered worth noting that I encountered while building the project

* NixOps still names its automated key pair as "Charon".
* Even though NixOps provides an SSH wrapper for created instances, there should be a way of using
  the key it created to access manually. This doesn't seem to be clear on the documentation.
* Building certain resources ends up taking a pretty generic form (for example, security groups).
  Should research if there are existing helper libraries to ease this process.
* There doesn't seem a way to handle "outputs" programatically (think of Terraform)
* The default example (the one with the trivial AWS example) didn't work, as its default SG did not allow connections from outside, so the SSH sanity check never passed
  * This is something to consider as well: the default sanity check expects a successful SSH connection. This is probably not an expected behaviour in certain cases, and I found nothing on how to disable this

## Closing notes and links

The NixOps experience has been a fun ride so far. Of course, the contents described in this post merely scratch the surface of what this tool is capable, and I'm anxious to continue my jounrey deep down this monster.

All things considered, documentation is lacking for essential parts of the tool, which heavily plays against adoption over its alternatives. If using NixOps interests you, I urge you to get in touch with the community (the NixOS Discord, or its IRC channel).

## Relevant links

* [NixOps' latest release documentation](https://releases.nixos.org/nixops/latest/manual/manual.html)
* [This post's project repository](https://github.com/ldelelis/nixops-demo)
